PANCHATANTRA

Once upon a time, in the south of India, there was a
city called Mahilaropyam. * A king by the name of
Amarsh,akti* lived there. He was a very learned man
and extremely accomplished in various arts and skills.
The king had three sons called Bahushakti*, Ugrashakti* and Anantashakti*, who were complete duds and
had no interest whatsoever in studying. Realising this,
the king assembled his ministers and addressed them
in these words, "Gentlemen, you already know how
ignorant my sons are. They have no understanding
whatsoever. Looking at them I cannot enjoy my kitlgdom.
As they say:
'Unborn, dead and stupid sons,
The first two are to be pref erred
For they cause sorrow only once
Whilst stupid sons ;;ire a torment to the heart
Till the end of life.'
And,
'What is the good of a cow
That neither bears a calf nor gives milk?
And, what is the good of a son
Who is neither enlightened nor devoted?'
-"So please tell me ways <:tnd means by which my sons
would be enlightened."
One of the ministers replied, "Your Majesty! Twelve
years are spent in learning grammar alone and then
the required sciences, economics, religion and sexology
are so vast that it takes a long time .to master them.
And only th.en the intelligence is awakened.''
But a minister, a man called Sumati said, "Our life
is transitory and these sciences take too long to master
them. So .we must find a shorter way to enlighten the
minds of the princes. I know of a Brahmin*, called 
Vishnu Sharma*, who is an expert in all the sciences
and has earned an excellent reputation among his
innurp.erable disciples. So I suggest that the princes
should be handed oyer to him. He will certainly instruct
them very well."
When the king heard this, he had Vishnu Sharma
invited to the palace and said to him, "Bhagawan*,
please educate my sons quickly in nitishastras*. I shall
be so grateful to you. I shall present you with a hundred
tax-free vi
llages."
This was the reply that Vishnu Sharma made to the
king. "Your Majesty, please listen to what I have to say.
Believe me, it's the truth. I would not like to sell mv
wisdom out of greed for money but if I have not made
your sons thorough in nitishastras within six months,
then I am .ready to forfeit my name. Hear my lion's
roar*. I don't crave for wealth. I am almost eight}f years
old and have all my desires under control. Now; would
you please make a note of today's date. If I have not
educated your sons in nitishastras within six months,
then I do not deserve a place in heaven."
The king and his ministers were surprised as well as
pleased to hear this seemingly impossible resolution.
With great appreciation and respect, the king handed
over his sons to the Brahmin and felt at ease.
After taking the princes to .his ashrama*, Vishnu
Sharma began to recite to them his specially composed
stories, divided into five tantras*.
· 1. Conflict amongst friends.
2. Winning of friends.
3. Crows and owls.
4. The forfeit of profits.
5. Action without due consideration.
Now they say:
"A man who has studied this nitishastra
Or listened to \ts precepts
Will never be defeated
Not even by Indra*, the Lord of the Heaven."
CONFLICT AMONGST FRIENDS
This is the beginning of the first tantra called, "Conflict
amongst friends".
"A great friendship had developed in the jungle,
Between the lion and the bullock,
But it was destroyed
By a very wicked and avaricious jackal."
Thi's is how the story goes :
In the south of India there was a city called
Mahilaropyam. The · son of a very rich merchant lived
there. His name was Vardhamanaka*. One night, as he
lay awake in bed, his thoughts were troubled. This is
what he was turning over in his mind. "Even when a.
man has plenty of money, it is still a good thing for
him to try to make more. As they say:
'There is nothing in life that money cannot achieve,
And so a wise man should be bent on increasing
his wealth.
If a man has money, he has friends,
When he has money,
He is recognisea by his relativc;s.
In this world a stranger becomes kinsman to a
moneyed man,
Whilst. a poor man is avoided even by his family.
A man with money will even be considerecLa scholar.
Money makes the old young,
But the young grow old for want of it.' "
Vardhamanaka came to a decision. On an auspicious
day, he took leave of his elders and made preparations
to travel to Mathura* with his wares. He. had two bullocks.
called Sanjivaka* and Nandaka*, both born in his house
and able to carry heavy loads. He harnessed them tb a
cart and set out, accompanied 'by a few servants.
After a few days, as they reached the bank of the
river Yamuna*, one of the bullocks, the one called
Sanjivaka, broke his leg and collapsed. Vardhamanaka
was most distressed to see his bullock in this condition
and for love of Sanj ivaka, he called· a halt at the place
for three nights.
When the cart drivers saw Vardhamanaka so dejected,
they said to him, "Most noble Sir, why loiter in a jungle
full of lions and tigers for the sake of one ox, when i t
may mean sacrificing everything. For they say:
'A wise man should never sacrifice big interests
For smaller ones.' "
When he heard them say this, Vardhamanaka left a
couple of men to look after the injured bullock and set
off on the remainder of the journey.
The following day, these men! caught up with hi·m .
.
They had thought that they 'day come to some harm
in the jungle ,and so they lied to Vardhamanaka;.c',.Sir,
Sanjivaka is dead. We burnt him in fire:' When he
heard this, Vardhamanaka performed the last rites, out
of gratitude to his devoted servant.
But Sanjivaka was destined to live longer. He ate tender
plants from the bed of the river Yamuna, thereby
regained a lattle of his .strength and somehow managed
to get up. The cool b,teezes greatly refreshed him . He
ate grass that was green and shining and within a few
days he became fat· and strong. It's true what they say :
"He whom fortune smiles on,
Though unprotected, eludes destruction,
But he who has luck against him, is done for,
Even though he be well protected .
A man left defenceless in a jungle survives,
But even after a great struggle to live,
He may die in his own house.''
Now in this very jungle · there lived a lion called
Pingalaka*, with an entourage of other animals. One
day he was parched with thirst and went to the bank
of the river Yamuna to drink water. There, he heard
from a great distance the hideous roar of Sanjivaka.
Pirigalaka was terrified .
**The Monkey and the Wedge
There was once a merchant who employed many carpenters and masons to build a temple in hisgarden. +egularly, they would start work in the morning=and take a break for the mid5day meals, and return to resume work till evening.:ne day, a group of monkey arrived at the site of the building and watched the workers leaving fortheir mid5day meals.:ne of the carpenters was sawing a huge log of wood. $ince, it was only half5done= he placed awedge in between to prevent the log from closing up. 2e then went off along with the other workers for his meal.When all the workers were gone, the monkeys came down from the trees and started >umping aroundthe site, and playing with the instruments.There was one monkey, who got curious about the wedge placed between the log. 2e sat down on thelog, and having placed himself in between the half5split log, caught hold of the wedge and startedpulling at it. ll of a sudden, the wedge came out. s a result, the half5split log closed in and the monkey gotcaught in the gap of the log. s was his destiny, he was severely wounded.The wise indeed say#
One, who interferes in other's work, surely comes to grief.
THE STORY OF THE MONKEY AND THE LOG
"A merchant had started building a temple beneath
the trees on the outskirts of a town. Every day the
carpenters and the workmen used to go into the town
for their midday meals. Now, one particular day, a troop
of wandering monkeys arrived on the scene. One of
the carpenters, who was in the middle of sawing a log, ·
put a wedge in it, to prevent the log from closing up,
1
and then went off.
"The monkeys started playing on the tops of the trees
and the hi'gh structures, without a care in the world.
One poor monkey, not destined to live long, sat down
on the half split log, caught hold of the wedge with his
hands and started pulling it out. And behold ! The wedge
came out all of a sudden and the log closed in, but not
before the monkey's legs had been trapped in the gap.
He was instantly killed.
-"And so," continued Karataka, "that's why I said, that
you should never meddle in other people's business.
And our business is to eat whatever has been left by
the lion . "
-"What!" retorted Damanaka . . "You think that our only
concern is to find food? I don't agree with you, for
they say:
'It's 'despicable crows
That live off whatever is available for eating.' "
-"Anyway," said Karataka, "now that we are no longer
in service to the king, why should we bother our heads
about it?"
-"N o ! " retaliated Damanaka. "Don't talk like' that, for :
' A man who i s not a minister, becomes one
When he serves the king well,
But even a minister can be removed from his post ,
If he fails· to serve him well.
The servant who pays attention to
What pleases or displeases his lord,
Can even get the upper hand over a wicked master.
And how can a wise man fail to handle a king
When he sees that snakes, tigers, elephants and
lions
Can be brought u ader control, one way or
another ! ' "
-"So, under the circumstances, what do you propose
to do?" asked Karataka.
-"Today our master and his court are scared .out of
their wits," replied Damanaka. "I shall take,it upon
myself to . find out the cause of their fear. Then I shall
use one of the six Diplomatic Methods, which are :
To make peace or war,
To attack or to entrench,
To take protection under a powerful ally
Or provoke a quarrel between one's opponents."
.
-"But, how do you know that our master is scared out
. of his wits?" asked Karataka.
-"You don't have to know anything," replied Damanaka.
As Manu* said :
'The thoughts of others can be ascertained
/
In their faces, their gestures, their speech,
And the twitching of their eyes.'
-"And so through· the power of my intelligence;) shall
free the terrified Pingalaka from his ·fear and, at the
same time, get back my position as minister."
___.'.'.But you don't know what service means," said
Karataka. "How then will you win him over?"
-"Well," said Damanaka, "while I was playing on my
father's lap, I listened to the fables told by Mahatmas*
and since then I have remembered the substance of
them and have stored them in my mind. Listen :
'Brave men, scholars, and those who know how to
serve,
Only these collect golden roses on this earth. '
And ,
'To serve a king,
Who , fails to appreciate the merits of the learned,
Is like ploughing a barren land.' "
-"But, do tell me," said R,arataka, "what will you say
to hi:µi to begin with?"
.
-"Whatever I say," said Damanaka, "must be said at
the right time for, even if Brihaspati* himself speaks at
the wrong moment, he will be insulted."
"But it's so difficult to influence kings", said Karataka.
"They are hard and heartless as the mountains and are
surrounded by wicked pe.ople."
-"That is true," said Da(manaka, "but:
'If a king is angry he must be flattered.
His friend should be considered a friend,
His enemy, an enemy.
And his presents ' · should be appreciated.
In this way he can be won over without magic.' "
-"If that's the case," said Karataka, "then it's up to
you. May Goa protect you."
Damanaka bowed, took leave of Karataka and then
went straight to the king. As soon as Pingalaka saw
Damanaka coming, he said to his guard, "Let Damanaka,
the son of my former minister, come in without any
hindrance."
When Damanaka arrived, Pingalaka spoke kindly to
him.
-'.'Are you happy?" he asked. "Why have you CQme to
see me after such a long time?"
--"Your Majesty ! " replied Damanaka. "Although my
master has no particular work for me, yet I must still
offer my services when the occasion demands. The king
needs all three types of people: High, middle and low.
And they say:
'If the king needs a little stick
To pick his ear or tooth,
How . much more does he need a man
Who ,has hands and the power of speech?'
-"Although we were always with you as your servants,
llowed you in bad times, yet our jobs were taken
even
.
away from us. That was unjust on your part and I
blame you, not the man who replaced us, for:
'A king who does not understand the difference
Between glass and diamonds,
Does not deserve to be served.
For how can a person of intelligence
Remain even for a moment
Jn a place, where men are unable to differentiate
. B etween right and wrong.
And conversely the servant who deserves to serve,
Is the man who, when honoured, remains humble,
When ·insulted, keeps a scowl from his face
And thus remains equally detached
From honour and insult.
For kings and servants mutually depend on each
other :
There can be no king without a servant
And no servant without a king.
When a king is pleased, he gives to his servants
Gold in abundance
And they in return for such honour,
Sacrifice themselves to him .'
-" I t is unbefitting that you should think us inferior
just because we are jackals, for :
'Silk comes out of the worm,
Gold out of the rocks,
The lotus from filth,
Fire from a piece of wood,_
And the gem from the hood of the cobra*. '
-"So, too," continued Damanaka, "virtue--can come out
of people humbly born."
Said Pingalaka, "It makes no difference whether you
are high or low, you are the son of my former mini_s_ter,
so if you have anything to say, say it without hesitation."
-"Master ! " said Damanaka. " Indeed I have something
to say."
-"Well then," said Pingalaka, "tell me."
-"But, I must tell you in confidenc ," said Damanaka,
for :
'Whatever· is heard by sir ears
Can neve'r remain secret'.,
And so a wise man should not allow his secrets
To reach six ears. ' "
The tiger, the wolves and the others understood the;
sign that Pingalaka made in response to this and went
away.
Then Damanaka said to the k, i ng, "You went to · the
rivet to drink wa,ter but you returned without doing so.
Why was that?"
-"Oh, for no particular reason," answer:# Pingalaka
with a smile.
--"I f it's something that you cannot talk about, then- so
be it," said Damanaka, for:
'There are some things that you can tell to wives,
Some to sons, some · to the family,
But you can't tell everything to everybody. ' "
When he heard this, Pingalaka thought to himself,
"The fellow seems deserving enough. I'll take him into
my confidence, for :
'When a man can share his sorrows
With a trusted friend or a devoted servant,
A kind master or a faithful wife,
That man finds relief.' "
S? Pingalaka asked Damanaka, "Can you hear that
terrifying noise in the distance?"
-"Yes," replied Damanaka, "I can, what of it?"
-"My friend," said Pingalaka, "I want to get away from
this jungle.''
,
-"Whatever for?" asked Damanaka.
-"Because," replied Pingalaka, "some monstrous animal
has come here and it is he who makes this . loud noise.
Probably he is as s,trong as his voice is loud .''
-"You mean that it's just a noise you are afraid of! "
exdaimed Damanal<.a. "That's not right. For generations
this jungle has belonged to you. It would be· wrong for
you to leave it suddenly like that. Besides, there are all
kinds o( noises µiade by drums, couches, Veena* and
so on, so you should never be ·afraid of a mere noise,
for :
'When the hungry jackal conquered his fear of a
noise,
He found food.' "
-"How was that?" asked Pingalaka .
And Darnanaka told :
THE STORY OF THE JACKAL AND THE DRUM
"There was once a jackal called 'Gomaya*. One day,
he was very hungry arid he wandered about in search
of food. At last he came to a battlefield. The fighting
armies had left behind a drum, lying near some creepers.
B ecause of a strong wind, the creepers were rubbing
against the drum and making a noise. When the 'jackal
heard this, he got frightened and thought to himself,
'Unless I can make myself scarce before whoever is
making this noise sees me, I am done for. But then, it
is unwise to desert one's house suddenly, so instead I
must try to find out who is making this noise. '
" S o h e took all his courage i n his hands and a s he
crept forward he realised that it was only a drum. He
continued his search and nearby he found sufficient
fool'l to last him a long time.
-"-''And, so you see," Damanaka went on, "you-shiluldn't
be afraid of a mere noise .''
-"How can I be brave," said Pingalaka, "when my whole
court is trembling with fright and wants to get away
from here?"
-"Master," said Damanaka, "servants should not be held
responsible for they only follow their master's example.
They say :
' 'Horses, weapons, books, conversation,
The harp and a wife,
They all become worthy or worthless
According to the man they belong to. '
-"And so," continued Damanaka, "be brave and wait
here patiently until I return. I am gding to find out
about the noise. And then we shall do whatever is for
the best."
-"Are· you brave enough to go?.' ' asked Pingalaka .
-"Certainly," said Damanaka, "besides, why should a
servant ask questions whether a thing is to be done or
not, if it is his ma.ste.r's pleasure."
" My, dear friend I" said Pingalaka. "Well, if that's the
case, then by all means, go. May God protect you . "
Damanaka bowed before the king and set out, following
the noise made by Sanjivaka.
,
After the jackal had taken his leave, Pinga'.laka got
frightened. He sank into a deep reverie and began to
think to himself, " I have made a mistake in confiding
my intentions to him. As I deprived him of his position,
he may join hands with my enemy and thus revenge
himself on me. And so I shall hide somewhere so as
to ·find out what he is up to and to make sure that . he
does .rot lead my enemy straight here to tell me,. for
they say:
'A strong man · who puts his faith in others,
May pay with his life,
But a weakling who is always wary,
Escapes death,
Even at the hands of the stro:p.gest of men.' "
And so having come to tliis decision; Pingalaka took
off and waited anxiously foi Damanaka's return.
In- the meantime, Damanaka .came near to where
Sanjivaka was, and realised that it was only a bullock,
making the noise. He was overjoyed, thinking to himself,
"This is a lucky omen: now I shall have Pingalaka under
my thumb because I have the power to make him and
this bullock friends or enemies, whichever I choose, for:
'As a man in good health requires n6' doctor I
So a king free from troubles pays no att.ention to
his minister.' "
With these thoughts, Damanaka returned and searched
ou t Pingalaka. Bowing before him, he took his place.
-"So did you se,e him?" asked Pingalaka.
-"With your good favour I have seen him, " replied
Damanaka.
-"Honestly?" asked Pingalaka. "Are you telling the
truth?"
-"Do you think anyone would dare lie to you ?" said
Damanaka.
"So, it's true?" said Pingalaka, "You have seen him.
The great do not assert themselves against weaklings,
that's why he did not kill you, for :
'The storm spares the low-bowing and weak grass
But uproots the tall trees.
The strong fight the strong
But not the weak.' "
-"Well. however great he may be, and however helpless
we seem by comparison," said Damanaka, 'just say the
word a.n,d I will make him your servant ! "
Pingalaka breathed a sigh of relief and said, "What!
Could you really do that?"
-"Wh;it is impossible for a man of intelHgence?" replied
Damanaka.
'-"Well," said Pingalaka, "if that is the case, I appoint
you my minister from this very day."
,
Damanaka took his leave and went straight to Sanjivaka.
He began to scold him, "Despicable ox! Aren't you afraid
of our master Pingalaka that you bellow at such odd
hours? Come with me. My master Pingalaka has.
summoned you."
When Saajivaka heard this he said, "My dear fellow,
who is this Pingalaka?"
-"What! " exclaimed Damanaka. "You haven't heard of
Pingalaka? Just you wait, you'll get to know him alright
soon ! He is over there, sitting under the banyan tree,
surrounded by his retinue.''
When Sanjivaka heard this, he thought that his end
had come and his heart sank. He said to Damanaka,
"My friend, you seem sympathetic and an expert in the
arts of conversation. If you want to take me to the lion,
get me a guarantee that my life will be safe.''
-"You are right to ask for security," -said Damanaka,
for :
'A man, can reach the ends of the earth
Or the depths of the sea
Or the tops of the mountains,
But none can fathom the deep thoughts of a king.'
"So wait here. I shall take you to him when the time
is ripe."
Then Damanaka returned to Pingalaka and said ,
"Master, that is no ordinary animal. He is an ox who
is a special mount of Shiva* . When I asked him he
explained to me, 'My Lord Shiva was very. pleased with
me and gave me leave to enjoy tpe tender grass of the
river Yamuna. And Lord Shiva said that the whole
jungle should be my playground .' "
-"Now I know the truth ! " exclaimed P!ngalaka__terrified.
"How else could a grass-eating animal wander feaFlessly
in a jungle full of dangerous beasts, except he had the
blessings of Shiva. But what did you say to him when
you heard that?"
-"Master," said Damanaka, "I told him, 'This jungle
has already been presented to our master by the goddess
Durga*, whose mount he is. But, all the same, you are
welcome. Come and stay with king Pingalaka as if you
were his own brother, spend your time making merry
with food and drink and games .' Well, he agreed but
has requested that you should' guarantee that his life
will be safe. So, the rest is up to you.''
When Pingalaka heard this, he said, "Well done, my
efficient minister. You have acted exactly according to
my wishes. I do assure him that his life shall be safe
but get me a similar assurance from him too and bring
him to me quickly."
Damanaka bow down before Pingalaka and, on his way to
Sanjivaka, he thought .gleefully, "My master is very
gracious towards me and js behaving exactly as I hoped.
I think I must be the luckiest being alive. "
W hen h e reached Sanjivaka, h e said to him respectfully,
"Friend, I made a request to my master that your life
should be spared. He has promised that it shall be so.
And so, accompany me with confidence. But when we
arrive at the king's place, you .should respect me as
much as you respect yourself. Don't get too big for your
boots and start bossing me about. On my part, I shall
consult you in the exercise· of my duties as a minister. .
In this way, we can both enjoy Lakshmi*, for :
'A man who; OU� of pride,
Does not properly handle the high, the middle and
the low,
Shall be· ruined, as Dantila* was ruined,
Even though l;ie was the favourite of the king.' "
-"How was that?" asked Sanjivaka.
And D amanaka told :
T.HE STORY OF THE MERCHANT DANTILA
"Somewhere in the wodd, is a city called Vardhamana*.
A very prosperous merchant, by the name Dantila, lived
there. He exercised authority over the whole city. During
his administration, he kept both the common people
and the king very happy. What more can be said'? A
man as wise as that has hardly been heard of or seen,
for :
'The man who seeks the good of the king,
Is hated by the common people
.
And the man who seeks the welfare of the people,
Is hated by the king.'
"In such conflicting circumstances, it 1s almost
impossible to find such a man, loved by the king a·s
well as the people.
" I n the course of time, the marriage of Dantila's
daughter took place. Dantila invited the entire public
and the king's officers. He entertained them sumptuous­
ly, g:ive them presents of clothing and in this way, he
honoured them. After the wedding, the king himself
with queen and the entire court were invited along to
Dantila's house and he showed them great respect.
"A servant by the name of Gorambha*r- who u.sed to
sweep the floors of the king's palace, came there too,
but uninvited. He sat down on a seat meant for someone
else. Dantila caught him by the neck and threw him
out.
"The servant felt insulted and could not sleep all night
for thinking', 'How can I get Dantila into disfavour with
the king and so ,get even with him. But then, what
chance have I, an ordinary fellow, of harming such a
powerful person as he is.'
"Several days later, early in the morning, when the
king was not yet wide awake, Gorambha was sweeping
the floor near his bed and said, 'Good heavens! Dantila
has become so brazen nowadays that he actually dares
to embrace the queen!'
"When .the king heard this, he jumped up and shouted,
'Gorambhal Is that true? Has Dantila really embraced
the queen?'
- 'Master,' replied Gorambha, 'I was gambling all night
and didn't sleep at all. This morning I feel drowsy. I
really don't know what I've been saying.'
"Jealous, the king thoug4t to himself, 'Yes! The serva.nt
Gorambha is allowed to go about freely in the palace
and so is Dantila. It is quite possible that Gorambha
has seen Dantila embracing my queen, for:
"What a man ponders over, sees or performs
During the day,
He will mutter in his dreams."
'And there is no doubt about it when a woman is
involved. She smiles at one man_, with half-opened lips,
throws a little remark at another; at the . same time
flirting with the third, her eyes half-closed , whilst in
her heart she dreams of yet another man, the one she
loves. Who can depend on the love of such a woman,
with eyebrows like the bo_ws- of an archer? The man
who thinks that a woman loves him, is a fool. He falls
into her trap - she'll treat him like a toy.'
"The king)o.s thoughts were so troubled that, from that
day onward, he withdrew his favours from Dantila and,
what is more, he forbade him e,.ven to enter the palace.
Dantila was astounded to see ·this sudden change in the
king's attitude and said to himself, 'It's true what they
say:
"Has anyone heard of
A crow that is clean,
A gambler who is honest,
A snake that forgives,
A passionate woman who is calm,
An impotent man who is _brave,
A drunkard with discrimination,
Or the friendship of a king."
- 'Even in my dreams, I have done no harm to anyone,
not t o the king himself, nor to anyone in his family.
Why then is the king so hostile towards me?'
"Some time passed .
. "One day, when Dantila wanted to pass through the
gateway to the palace, he was stopped by the guards.
Gorambha, who was sweeping the floor, saw this and
he said with a smirk, 'Ho! Guards ! That fellow is the
king's favourite. He can arrest or release people, just
as he pleases. He threw me out1• Be careful, you may
suffer the same fate.'
"When Dantila heard this, he thought to himself, ' It
is surely Gorambha who has caused the trouble. Now
I u nderstand why they say:
"The king's servant,
Though he be of low caste, foolish or mean,
Is respected wherever he goes.'' '
"Dantila felt upset and returned home in a very
dejected mood. He thought it over and that evening,
he invited Gorambha to his house, gave him a pair of
garments and said kindly, 'My dear friend; it was not
because I was angry that I threw you out that day but
because it was an impropriety for you to take the seat
you took - it was reserved for a Brahmin. The B rahmin
felt insulted, that's why I had to throw you out. Forgive
me.'
"When Gorambha: saw the clothes, he was very pleased.
Full of joy, he said to Dantila, 'Sir, now I forgive you.
You have expressed your regrets and also honoured
me. Once again you shall see the favour of the king
and in this way I shall prove to you my cleverness.'
With these words Gorambha went home happily.
"Next morning, he went to the palace a.nd started
sweeping the floor. When he had made sure that the
king was lying half awake, he said, 'The king is really
indiscreet, he eats cucumber in the lavatory ! '
"The king was taken aback to hear this and h e shouted,
'You ! Gorambha! What's that nonsense you're talking!
I t's only because you're my servant that I don't kill you.
Have you ever seen me doing such a thing?'
- 'Mastet/ said Gorambha, 'I was gambling last night
and didn't sleep at all. This morning I feel drowsy. I
really don't know what I've been sayfog. But if I've said
anything o:ut of place, please forgive me.'
"When the king heard this, he thought to himself,
'Never in my life have I eaten cucumber in the lavatory.
If this fool has said something ridiculous about me?
surely what he said about Dantila was ridiculous too. It
was wrong of me to . have insulted Dantila. Besides,
without him, the whole administrative system, at the
palace and in the city, has become slack.'
"When he had considered this carefully the king
invited Dantila to the palace, presented him with jewels
and clothing and reappointed him to his former position . .
-"And so," continued Damanaka, "that's why I said:
'A man who, out of pride,
Does not properly handle the high, the middle and
the low, .
Shall be ruined, as Dantila was ruined,
Even though he was the favourite of the king.' "
-"Brother," said Sanjivaka, "you're right, I'll do exactly
as you say."
Then Damanaka brought Sanjivaka to Pingalaka and
said, "Master, I have brought Sanjivaka to you. Now I
leave everything in your hands.''
Sanjivaka 'bowed before Pingalaka and . stood before
him respectfully. Pingalaka greeted him with similar
respect and asked, "My friend, how is the world with
you? How do you come to be in this wild jungle?" And
Sanjivaka told him all that had happened to him.
When Pingalaka had finished listening to Sanjivaka's
story, he said kindly, "My dear Sanjivaka, don't be afraid .
Move about as freely _as you, please in this jungle, which
my claws and arms protect. However, you must always
'stay near me, for this jungle is inhabited by wild beasts,
dangerous even 'to very powerful animals, to say nothing
of grass-eaters."
With this, Pingalaka went to the bank of the river
Yamuna to drink water to his heart's content. And then
he returned to the jungle. He entrusted the administra­
tion of the kingdom to Karataka and Damanaka and
began to listen to Sanjivaka's moral tales - this is how
he spent his time.
Sanjivaka had made a thorough study of the shastras*,
and, in a few days, he considerably enlightened the dull
Pingalaka and made him forget his wild mannerisms,
Every day they had discussions together in secret. All
the other animals stayed at a distance, even Pamanaka
and Karataka were forbidden to approach them.
As the lion would no longer go huntingg,all the animals
including Damanaka and Karataka began to starve. They
say:
"As birds forsake an old and withered tree,
No longer bearing fruit and fly elsewhere,
So servants forsake a king,
From whom they no longer benefit."
When Karataka and Damanaka had given up all hope
of a change in the king's attitude, they held a discussion
together.
-"B rother Karo,taka," said Damanaka, "again we're in
a spot. Ever since Pingalaka has been taken up by this
talk of Sanjivaka's, he has neglected all his responsibilities.
His entire court has deserted him. Now what are we
going to do?"
-"Even if the master does not listen to you," said
Karataka, "it is still your duty to set his faults right. It's
a m inister's duty to advise a king, whether the king
accepts his advice or not. If a proud king _o,r an agitated
elephant follows the wrong path, it's the fault of the
minister and the mahout. You brought the grass-eating
Sanjivaka to the master. You yourself have raked the
burning coals ."
-"That's very true," said Damanaka. "It is my fault,
not the master's. They say:
'The jackal between the fighting rams
And the Sanyasi* who trusted Ashadhbhuti* ,
Were themselves to blame.' "
-"How was that?" asked Karataka.
And Damanaka told :
THE STORY OF THE JACKAL AND THE SANYASI
"Once upon a time, in a lonely matha*, there lived a
Sanyasi called Dev Sharma*. Many people used to visit
him and present him with finely wovei:i garments, which
he sold and got very rich on the proceeds. As a result
of being so rich, he trusted nobody. Night and day he
kept the treasure purse under his armpit and would
not part with it even for a second. As they say:
'Getting money is an arduous toil 
And guarding it is even more of a trial.
Coming and going money causes trouble,
Damn this unending source of worry! '
"A swindler b y the name o f Ashadhbhuti, who robbed
other men of their money, noticed that the Sanyasi kept
the treasure purse under his armpit. He said to himself,
'How could I rob this man of his morieyl It's difficult
to make a hole through the walls of the matha or to
get i n over the high gates, so what I'll do is charm him
with honeyed words so that he accep ts me as, his disciple.
And when he has put confidence in me, some day he'll
fall into my clutches. As they say:
"A man who has· no desires,
Doesn't deprive others of their rights."
.
And,
"A man with no passion
Doesn't adorn himself,
The fool does not speak subtly,
And the man who speaks out his mind,
Is never a cheat." '
"When he had resolutely made up1 his mind, to carry
oul this plan, Ashadhbhuti approached , Dev Sharma,
stood before him with reverence and said, 'Om Namaha
Shivaya*J! With these words, he threw himself humbly
on the ground before Dev Sharma and said, 'Oh,
Bhagawan, this life is futile ! Youth gushes by, like a
mountain stream. Life is like <:l fire in the grass, all its
pleasures ar¢ as transient as the clouds in autumn, and
one's relationship with friends, sons, wives and servants
is no more than a dream. This I have clearly realised.
Now guide me that I may cross the ocean of life.'
"When· Dev. Sharma heard this, he said kindly, 'My
son; you are indeed blessed that you have come to give
up the world in your youth. You ask for direction to
cross this ocean of life. Then listen. According to my
way . of thinking:
"The good man's mind
Has the peace of old age
Whilst his body is still young,
But the wicked man's body
Is feeble with age
Whilst his mind remains young.'' '
"When Ashadhbhuti heard this, he fell on. the ground
before Dev Sharma, touched his feet, and said, 'Oh,
B hagawan, initiate me in the secrets ! '
- ' M y child !', answered Dev Sharma, ' I will, but on one
condition, , . that you will never enter the matha at night,
because Sanyasis are recommended to stay alone at night
without company, and we will keep to it, you and I .
For they say:
"A king is ruined through baa advisers,
A Sanyasi tfiiough company,
A son through over-indulgence,
A Brahmin through lack of studying the shastras,
A business or a farm through neglect,
And a family and character through contact with
bad people."
'And so,' continued Dev Sharma, 'after taking the
vow of initiation, you will --have to sleep m a thatched
hut at the gate of the matha.'
- 'I shall willingly carry out your wishes,' said
Ashadhbhuti.
"At bedtime, Dev Sharma initiated Ashadhbhuti
according to the rituals and made him his disciple.
Ashadhbhuti massaged his hands and feet, waited upon
him and made him happy but nonetheless Dev Sharma
did not part with his money bag even for a second.
"After some time, Ashadhbhuti began to think, 'He
does not trust me at alll Shall I knife him in broad
daylight, poison liim or kill him like a wild animal? '
"While h e was thinking this over, the son o f o n e of
Dev Sharma's disciples, from a nearby village, tame to
give him a personal invitation and said, 'Bhagawan !
Today the ceremony of the sacred thread* takes place
in our house. Please come and sanctify it with your
presence.'
" Dev Sharm;::. gladly accepted the invitation and
Ashadhbhuti accompanied him. On the way, they came
to a river. When Dev Sharma saw the river, he folded
his money bag in his robe and said, 'Ashadhbhuti, look
after this robe with the vigilance of a Yogi* until I
return.' And he went into the bushes. The minute Dev
Sharma's back was turned, Ashadhbhuti vanished with
the money bag.
"Meanwhile, as Dev Sharma was answering the call of
nature, he saw in the distance, two golden rams, fighting
each other. They rammed into each other until the
blood oozed out, but still they refused to stop fighting.
"Meai;iwhile, a blood-thirsty jackal arrived on the scene
and began to lick the blood from the ground. Dev
Sharma thought to himself, 'If he comes in between the
two fighting rams, he's sure to get himself killed.'
"Sure · enough, craving for the blood, the jackal got
caught up in the fight. He was hit on the head, fell
down and died.
"Dev Sharma finished what he was doing and slowly
returned, thinking about this incident and also about
his money. When he got back, he failed to find
Ashadhbhuti but saw only his robe, lying on the ground.
He peered anxiously inside it but could not find his
purse. He began to cry out, 'Alas! I have been robbed ! '
And h e fell to the ground, in a swoon.
"After a minute or so, he returned to his senses. He
got up arid began to shout 'Ashadhbhuti, where are
you, yoti swindler! Answer me! ' After he had shouted
like this in a loud voice, he slowly trailed Ashadhbhuti's
footsteps until, just before evening, he came to a village.
He stayed there a short time and then returned to his
matha.
-"And so," continued Damanaka, "that's why I said :
'The jackal between the fighting rams
And the Sanyasi who trusted Ashadhbhuti,
W ere1 themselves to blame.' "
-"So, under the circumstances, what should we do?"
said Karataka.
-"At this very moment, I'm getting inspiration," said
I)amanaka. "I shall ,cleverly create · discord between hjm
and the master and separate them, for they say:
'An arrow, shot from . a bow
Ma}' or may not kill a man,
But the wit of a clever man
Can destroy a host of enemies.' "
-"Oh, but brother! " said Karataka. " If, somehow or
other, Pingalaka or Sanjivaka. finds out about your
scheme to bring about discord between them, you're
done for! "
_-" My dear Karataka," said Damanaka, "don't. talk like
that. When you fall on bad times and luck's against you,.
you should go on trying, for:
'Lakshmi _ bestows her favours,
On the zealous man.
She scorns the idle,
Who depend entirely on luck.
So1 brush destiny as!de
And try with all your might.
If you still fait,
Ffod out what went wrong.'
-"And so," Damanaka went on, "that's . w4y I shall
continue to work on them so subtly that neither of them.
will have a chance to know anything about it."
When he heard this, Karataka said, "Very well the
brother, but I feel frightened because Sanjivaka is wise
and the lion is fierce: Even though you have a sharp
wit, I think it's he.y.qpd your power to. separate them
and get away with it."
-"I t may seem beyond me," said Damanaka, "but I'll
manage it, for :
.
'What cannot be achieved by force,
Can be achieved through deceit.
With the llelp of the gold chain,
The female crow killed the black cobra-. ' "
-"How was that?" asked Karataka.
And Damanaka told :
THE STORY OF THE HERON AND' THE CRAB
" 'Somewhere in the jungle, there was a big lake, and
in it lived all kinds bf water creatures. A heron also
lived there. He had grown old and had no strength left
to catch the fishes. Because he was starving, he had
become lean.
" 'One day, he came to , the edge of the pond and
began to say loudly, shedding his tears like pearls. A
crab came up to . him (a number of fishes were also
with him) and asked sympathetically, "l!nclel Are you
alright? Why aren't . you eating today and why are you
crying? Why these sighs?"
·
-"Ah, child," replied the heron, " I have decided to
renounce the world. I have been a fish-eater but now
I wouldn't fouch them even if they come near me, f<;>r
I have undhtaken a fast unto death. "
-"What is 'the reason fo r your renunciation?" . the crab
asked him.
-"Well," said the heron, "I was born in this pond and
it is here I've grown old. Now I have heard that there
will be no rain here for the next twelve years. "
-"Where have you heard that?" exclaimed the crab.
-"Frpm the mouth of an astrologer," said the heron.
"He said that it _is writteµ in an astrological book that,
due to the planetary positions, there will be no rain for
twelve years. There's not much water in this pond now,
i t · will get less and less and in the end, it will dry u p
completely. Consequently, without water, the water
creatures I grew :up with and played games with will
die. I cannot ·bear to be separated from them. That's
why I've taken on this fast unto death. The water
creatures of the small ponds are being evacuated to
larger ones by their relatives, while the tortoises,
crocodiles and the __bigger animals are going elsewhere
on their own. But the water creatures here don't seem
to care. l am crying because everything will be completely
wiped out."
" 'The crab told this to the other water creatures . . All
the crabs , fishes, tortoises and everybody were in a state
of panic. They went to the heron and said, "Is there
no way out? Can't we protect ourselves against this
disaster?"
-"Well," said the heron, "not far from here is a lake,
full of water. Even if there was no rain for . twenty-four
years, this lake, which is covered with lotus flowers, will
never dry up. If somebody rides on my back I can take
him there. "
" 'And, in this way, h e gained their confidence. They
gathered round him, crying, " Uncle! Father! Brother !
Me first ! Me first! Please! " The wicked heron took them,
one1 by one, on his back. When he had flown a little
away, he would smash them against a rock and eat them
to his heart's content. When he got back, he would
deliver false messages to their relatives.
" 'One day the crab said to the heron, "Uncle, I was
friends with you first and yet you take the others before
me. Now save my life too." When he heard this, the
heron thought to himself, "I am tired Q.f eating fisl;i
everyday. To change the monotony of the food, I'll eat
this crab today." Ana so he took the crab on his back
and carried him to the rock where he had killed the
fishes. The crab recognised the heap of bones aµ.d the
skeletons of the fishes and understood everything. But
calmly he said to the heron, "Uncle ! Say, how far is
this pond? You must be tired of carrying me. I am
very heavy." The heron thought to himself, "Now this
dumb water creature is in my power, he cannot escape
my clutches." So, with a smirk, he said to the crab,
"Crab, where could there be another pond? This trip
is for my food . I am going to smash you against this
rock and eat you. "
" 'As soon a s the heron had said this, the crab put
his claws round the white, lotus-like neck of the heron
and strangled him to death.
" 'The crab slowly dragged the neck back to the pond.
All the water dwellers gathered round him and began
to ask, " Crab, why are you back? And why hasn't uncle
returned with you? Why is he wasting time? We are all
i mpatient for a chance to be taken. "
" 'Then the crab laughed and said, "You fools! That
swindler was not taking the water creatures to any pond;
he was smashing them against a rock, not far from
here, and eating them. I was destined to stay alive and
understood what he was up to. I killed the trickster
and I've brought back his neck. Now there's no need
to worry. V"fe are safe."
-'That's why I said,' continued the jackal, 'a greedy
heron, who was feeding on large, medium and small­
sized fishes, was killed, by a mere crab.'
"After listening to this, the crow said, 'Friend , tell us
how we can kill the wicked cobra. '
-'Well,' said the jackal, 'go to a city that is the capital
of a kingdom. Visit the house of some wealthy man, a
minister or someone, and see if they have been careless
enough to leave a gold chain or a necklace lying about.
Pick it, up, ai;id making sure that the servants are
watching you, fly off slowly with it and drop it in the
hollow of the tree where the snake lives. When the
servants run after you to get the necklace back, they'll
see the snake and it's certain they'll kill him.'
"The crows decided to take the jackal's advice and
flew off. As they were flying, the female noticed a lake,
in which the women of the harem were swimming. They
had left gold and pearl necklaces with their clothes on
the bank of the lake. The female crow picked up a gold
chain in her beak and started flying slowly to her nest.
" When the eunuchs saw this, they picked up their
sticks and started running after the female crow. She
let the gold chain fall near the hollow of the tree where
the snake lived and seated herself on a tree near by.
When the king's servants arrived . on the scene, they
were confronted by a snake with swelling hood, before
the hollow of the tree. They killed him with sticks,
recovered the gold chain and returned home. And the
crows lived happily ever after.
-"And so," continued Damanaka, "that's why, I said :
'What cannot be achieved by force,
Can be achieved through deceit.'
-"Nothing in this world is impossible for a clever man.
B ecause he was clever, the hare killed a mighty lion
living in the jungle."
-"How was that?" asked Karataka.
THE STORY OF THE LION AND THE HARE
" In the jungle, there lived a lion by the name of
Bhasuraka* . He was very powerful and used to kill the
other animals indiscriminately.
"One day, all the antelopes, boars, buffaloes, hares,
and the rest went together to the lion and said, 'Master,
why do you persist in killing so many of us everyday
so u nnecessarily, when one animal would satisfy your
hunger? Please come to an understanding with us. From
today onward we promise to send to your lair, one
animal everyday for your food, if in return you guarantee
that we shall be able to wander about unmolested in
the j ungle. In this way, you will have no trouble
maintaining yourself and we won't be killed so
indiscriminately. They say:
"As by taki11g medicine in small doses,
A man grows strong,
So too a king becomes powerful
. B y taxing his subjects bit by bit.
A cow must be well cared for,
B efore she yields milk
And the creepers watered
B efore they give beautiful flowers,
So too a ' king must take care of his subjects,
If he wants to get the best out of them." '
"When he had finished listening to this, Bhasuraka
said, 'It's very true, wl;iat you say, but if I don't receive
one animal everyday, I shall eat every one of you ! '
"The animals promised that they would keep their
word. Accordingly, everyday they drew lots, sent one
animal to the lion and roamed in the jungle, unah aid.
"One day it was the hare's turn. Forced by the other
animals, he made his way to the lion, slowly al}.d very
much against his will.
"On the way, the hare was considering how he might
kill the lion, when he came to a well. He leapt up on
the edge and saw his reflection in the water. At this,
he thought to himself, 'Now I know a way that won't
fail. I'll deceive the lion and make him fall into the
well.'
"By the time the hare reached the lion, the sun was
setting. B hasuraka was in a fury because he had been
kept waiting; He licked his lips hungrily and said to
himself, 'The first thing I'll do tomorrow is kill all those
animals ! '
"When h e was thinking this, the hare came slowly and
stood before him . The lion flared up and began to
shout at him, 'You miserable creature! First you are too
small and secondly you are late. Well, for this, I'm going
to kill you immediately and I'll kill the rest of them in
the jungle tomotrow morning.'
-'Master,' replied the hare very humbly, 'it is not my
fault nor the fault of the other animals. Please listen
and I will explain.'
-'Hurry up and tell me before I crush you ! ' said the
lion.
-'Well,' said the hare, 'today it fell to my lot to come
to you. Because I am small, they sent four other hares
with me. On the way, a huge lion came out of the den
and cried, "Ho! You ! Where are you going? Call upon
your chosen deity!" And I said, "Sir, we are all going
to our master Bhasuraka at the appointed time to fulfil
our promise."
'And he said, "Who is this Bhasuraka? I'm the master
of the jungle! You should fulfil your promises only to
me. Bhasuraka is an imposter! I shall hold four of you
hares as hostages while you (meaning me) go and
challenge Bhasuraka to a trial of strength with me.
Whoever turns out to be stronger, deserves to be king
of the jungle and only he shall eat all the hares ! "
-'And so,' continued the hare, ' I have come to you as
he ordered me to. That is why I am late. Now, do as
you think best.'
"When he heard this, Bhasuraka said, 'Friend, if this
is true, then take me to this pretender immediately so
that I can pour out on him all my rage against you
and . then I shall be quiet! '
-'Master,' said the hare, 'it is the truth, but this lion
lives in a stronghold. It's difficult to attack someone
who is hiding in a stronghold, for they say:
"A single archer, behind the wall of a castle
Can fight a hundred men of the enemy." '
"When he . heard this, Bhasuraka replieq, 'Friend ! He
may have hidden himself in his stronghold, but just
show him to me and I'll kill him, for they say:
"Sup press your enemies and diseases
At the very beginning
Or they will become strong
And destroy you." '
-'That's true,' said the hare, 'but I've seen him. He is
very strong. It would . be unwise of you to approach
him without finding out exactly what his strength is,
for they say :
"He who attacks an enemy,
Without knowing his strength,
Is sure to be destroyed,
Like a moth in the fire." '
-'That's not your concern,' said B hasuraka, just take
me to him ! '
-'Very well then,' said the hare,, 'come with me.'
"The hare went ahead so as to lead the lion to the
well.
'When they reached the well, the hare said to the lion,
'My Lord ! Who can withstand your power! The i mposter
has seen you coming and has hidden himself in his
stronghold ! ' And the hare pointed out the well.
"The foolish lion saw his reflection in the water and
imagined that it was his enemy. He roared fearfully and
at once his roar was doubly re-echoed from the well:
Furious at the other lion, he leapt in upon him and
was drowned.
"Very pleased with himself, · the hare went back to the
jungle and told . the other animals what had happened .
They showered him with praise and all lived happily
ever after.
-"And so," continued Damanaka, "that's why I said :
It's the clever man who is powerful. Now, if you think
fit, I shall use my cleverness to create dissension between
the lion and Saajivaka."
-"I f you can," said Karataka, "then do it. And may
God protect you . "
O n e day, shortly afterwards, seeing Pingalaka sitting
apart from Sanjivaka, Damanaka bowed and stood before
him .
-"M y friend ! " said Pingaiaka. "Where have you been
hiding for so long?"
-"I didn't come," said Damanaka, "because you wouldn't
have anything to do with me. But I have come now,,
of my own accord, to talk with you because I see the
impending destruction of all your administration · and
my heart is heavy with grief."
When he heard Damanaka speaking so intently,
Pingalaka asked him, "What are you trying to say to
me? Out with it!"
-"Master," replied Damanaka, "Sanjivaka hates you !
This very ox that you collsider to be your friend, is in.
reality your enemy. He told me in confidence,
'Damanaka, I have got to know all about Pingalaka's
strength and weaknesses. I am going to kill him and
become king of the animals. Then I shall appoint you
as my minister.' "
When Pingalaka heard this, he was flabbergasted, as
if a thunderbolt had struck him, and he could not speak.
Damanaka saw this and thought to himself, "Pingalaka
certainly has too much confidence in Sanjivaka.
Undoubtedly this will lead to Pingalaka's destruction.
They say:
'When a king submits himself entirely
To one adviser,
That man becomes haughty and mad for power :
He will try to be independent
And as this desire grows .in his heart,
In the end he will secretly plan the king's death.' "
After some time, Pingalaka recovered himself and said,
"What shall I do? Sanjivaka has becotne as dear to me
as my own life. I cannot believe that he could betray
me."
_:_"Master," replied Damanaka, "being a servant is always
painful. Only the weak, the ones with no initiative,
fahhfully. serve the king for ever."
-'-"All the same," said Pingalaka, "still my mind is not
poisoned against him .''
-"Your M ajesty," ·said Damanaka, "you are .making a
great mistake. And in any case, what particular virtue
do you see in Sanjivaka? He is a fellow without qualities!
h..n d if you think that he is a heavy animal and will
help you kill your enemies, you are hlistaken. He is a
mere grass-eater and all your enemies are carnivorous.
And so, the best thing you can do is accuse him of
some offence and kill him."
-"To find fault with someone after opfnly singing his
praises," said Pingalaka, "will be like breaking an oath.
B esides, I have given my word, as you advised me to,
that he would be safe. How then can I kill him with
my own hands? Sanjivaka is a real friend to me, I have
no reason whatever to be angry with him, for :
'It is not good to cut down even a poisonous tree,
If it has been planted by one's own hands.'
And,
'First it is foolish to love,
But if love one must,
That love should be allowed to grow .'
And again,
'It is shameful to raise someone up
And afterwards to cause his downfall.'
-"And so, even if Sanjivaka has turned traitor to me,
I shall not lift my hand against him."
-"Your Majesty," replied Damanaka, "to take pity on
an enemy is against the royal code. And if you follow
this non-violent creed, where will the others get meat
from? If they forsake you, you too will die. When you
are i n the company of Sanjivaka, you don't even think
of going out hunting, because:
' I n the company of the wicked,
The good follow the wrong path,
And so the wise shun the company of wicked men.'
And,
'Refrain from entertaining a man
Whose character is unknown.
The bug was at fault
But instead they killed the flea.' "
-"How was that?" asked Pingalaka.
And Damanaka told :
THE STORY OF THE BUG AND THE FLEA
" I n a certain country lived a king who had a very
beautifully decorated bedroom. An exquisite white silk
sheet covered the bed and in the folds of the sheet,
there lived a white flea, by the name of Mandavisarpini*.
She used to drink the blood of the king and, in this
way, spem her time very happily.
"One day, a bug by the name of Agnimukhi* crept
into the bedroom. When the flea caught sight of him,
she cried, 'Agnimukha! What are you doing here? Get
out at once ! '
-'Madam,' replied the bug, 'that's not the way to speak
to a guest, even if he is a good-for-nothing. A lady
householder should hold out her hand even to someone
of low caste. She should say, "Welcome! Please take a
seat here and make yourself comfortable. You have
visited me after many days. Tell me, what is the latest
news? You are looking rather .thin. Are you well? I am
delighted to see you again!_._" '
-'And besides,' continued the bug, 'I have drunk all
types of blood, but so far I have never had the pleasure
of tasting the blood of a king. I think it must be very
sweet, for he has been eating the choicest food. Now,
if you will permit me, ,I would love to taste the king's
blood. I have come ' to your house faint with hunger.
Mandavisarpini, it is unworthy of you to enjoy the king's
blood all to yourself! Let me too have a share of it. '
-'But, Agnimukha,' said the flea, 'I only suck the king's·
blood when he has gone fast asleep but you are nasty
and bite like a sharp needle. However, if you promise
to let the king go to sleep before you start biting n.hn,
then I will let you drink his blood.'
-'Oh, I dd promise ! ' replied the bug, 'I will even swear
to wait until you have sucked his blood before I suck
it myself! '
.
"While they were talkfog, the king came and lay down
o n the bed. The bug's mouth began to water and he
·
took a bite of the king, without waiting for him to fall
asleep. They say:
'You can.not change a person's temperament by
preaching,
Even boiled water will finally get cold .'
"Th e bug's bite was like a sharp needle. The king
jumped up and cried out to his servants, 'Heyl
Something's bitten me! See if there is a bug or a flea
in my bed !'
"When the bug heard this, he hid himself in a corner
'
o r the bed . When the servants came and searched with
sharp eyes, they found a flea lying between the folds
of the sheets, and killed her.
-"And so," continued Damanaka, "that's why I s11 id :
'Refrain from entertaining a man
Whose character is unknown.
The bug was at fault
But instead they killed the flea.'
And they also say:
'He who sacks his own confidants
And engages outsiders in their place,
Shall die like King Kukudruma*.' "
-"How was that ?" asked Pingalaka.
And Damanaka told :
THE STORY OF THE JACKAL WHO FELL INTO A VAT OF INDIGO DYE
" I n a jungle, there lived a jac;kal by the name of
Chandaravati. One day he was very hungry, so he went
into the city to find food.
"There, he was surrounded by . dog$ barking loudly.
They set upon him and wounded hirh with their sharp
teeth. To save his skin, he ran into a dyer's house. A
big vat of indigo dye was lying the. In he jumped
and consequently his whole body was dyed indigo
he no longer looked like a jackal.
"When he came out, the dogs were unable to recognize
him and ran off in all directions, terrified.
"The jackal himself went back to the jungle. The indigo
dye would not come off. As they say:
'Glue, an idiot, a woman, a crab,
A shark, indigo dye and a drunkard,
Once they attach themselves to something,
They will never let go.'
"Back in the jungle, when the animals, the lions, tigers,
elephants, wolves and the rest of them, saw the
indigo-coloured jackal, they ran away in terror and said
to one another, 'Let's run ;;iway for we don't know the
strength of this animal or what to expect of him, for
they say:
"A man of intelligence who seeks his welfare,
Will never trust anyone
Whose character, family and strength
He does not know." '
"When the jackal saw the frightened animals, he called
them back and said, 'Ho! Animals! Why are you running
off in panic? Don't be afraid . Brahma* has made me
himself, with his own hands, and he said, "The animals
have no king, so I have crowned you king, with the
title, Kukudruma. Go to the earth and protect them
well.!
'And so,' continued the jackal, 'that's why I've come
here. Live in my kingdom, under my protection. · I,
Kukudruma, have been crowned King of the Three
Worlds* ! '
"When all the animals, the lions, tigers, and the rest
of them, heard this, they surrounded him and said,
'Master, we await your commands.'
'Kukudruma assigned specific duties to all the animals,
but he said, he would have nothing to do with jackals,
and they were all chased away.
"The lion and the tiger used to go out hunting and
bring the prey before the jackal. He would then distribute
it amongst the other animals. Thus, he discharged his
kingly duties.
"In this way, quite some time elapsed . O ne day,
Kukudruma heard in the distance the howl of a pack
of jackals. He was spellbound, his eyes filled with tears
of joy, he stood up and began to howL
"When the lion and the other animals heard him howl,
they realised that he was only a jackal and they lowered
their heads in shame.
" O nly for . a moment did they remain in this attitude.
Then they said angrily to each other, 'This despicable
jackal has fooled us ! We will kill him ! '
"When Kukudruma heard this, h e tried to escape but
was torn in pieces on the spot and killed.
-"And so," continued Damanaka, "that's why I said:
'He who sacks his own confidants
And engages outsiders in their- place,
Shall die like King Kukudruma.' "
When he heard this, Pinga1aka asked, "But, what proof
do you have in this case, that Sanjivaka has evil designs
against me?"
-"Here is the proof,'' said Damanaka. "This morning
he made a firm resolution in front of me to kill you.
Now, tomorrow morning, when he visits you, his eyes
will be red, his lips quivering and he will giye you a
malicious look. When you see this, do what you think
best."
Then Damanaka came to Sanjivaka, bowed and stood
humbly before him
When Sanjivaka saw namanaka, he said, "Worthy
friend, welcome! You have visited me after many days.
Are you well? Tell me what your wishes are and I shall
certainly fulfil them."
·
-"How can servants be well?" replied Damanaka. "They
say:
'The poor, the sick, fools, exiles,
And servants who have to serve all their lives,
All these, although Ilving,
Are, in reality, dead.'
-"To say that service is dog's work is untrue, for even
dogs are allowed to wander wherever they please, but
servants cannot even leave the house without their
master's permission.''
-"Come to the point," said Sanjivaka. "What are you
trying to say?"
_:_"Friend ," replied Damanaka, "it's wrong for a minister
to expose his master's secrets, but still, I will, in order
to save- your life. For I know that you truth me im plicitly
and it was on my advice that you first came to this
place. Now understand this: Pingalaka has evil designs
against you ! Today he said to me in confidence,
'Tomorrow I shall kill Sanjivaka, invite · all the animals
to a feast and feed them on his flesh.' I said to him,
'Master! It is shameful to betray a friend in order to
fill one's own belly ! ' Immediately he said to me, 'You
fool ! Sanjivaka is a grass-eater and we flesh-eaters. We
are natural enemies. If we kill him, we are not at fault.'
When . I understood that Pingalaka was resolute, I came
to you so that I shall not be guilty of betraying someone
who trusts me. That's why I have confided everything
in you. Now do whatever you think best.''
When Sanjivaka heard these words, he was
dumbfounded, as if struck by a thunderbolt. When he
had recovered a little, he sighed deeply and said to
himself,
"The fool who thinks that a king loves him,
Should be thought of as an ox without horns. "
-"I t was wrong o f m e t o make frien_ds with Pingalaka,
for:
'Enter into marriage ties and friendship
Only with those, who are socially and financially
Your equals.'
_
-"And so, even if I try to appease Fingalaka, it will
--
be completely pointless, for :
'If a man is angry for some reason,
He calms down,
When the cause is removed.
But who can appease a man
Who decides upon enmity
For no reason at all?'
-"I now understand that Pingalaka has been incited
against me by people who are jealous of me. This is
why he talks as he does when it is quite untrue that I
have evil designs against him, for :
'When a man has two wives,
One cannot tolerate
That the other should be preferred .
So the servants of the king
Cannot bear it
When the master favours one of them.' "
-"Friend," said Damanaka, " you shouldn't be afraid.
Even if some wicked fellow has made the master angry
with you, he will nonetheless be appeased by your
charming conversation."
-"M y dear fellow," said Sanjivaka, "that's not true. It
is impossible to rive amongst wicked people, even
insignificant ones, for they say:
'Wicked people, although they may be insignificant,
Are mean-minded and live deceptively;
One way or another, they will cause you death,
Just as the jackal and the others did to the camel.' "
-"How was that?" asked Damanaka.
And Sanjivaka told :
THE STORY OF THE LION, THE CAMEL, THE JACKAL AND THE CROW
" I n a certain part of the jungle, there lived a lion
king, by the name of Madotkata*. His retinue was
comprised' of a jackal, a crqw and other animals. One
day as th<:;y were wandering through the jungle, they
saw a camel which had been separated from its caravan.
-'This seems to be an extraordinary animal,' said - the
-
lion, 'go and ask him where he comes from.'
"The crow spoke up and said, 'Master, this animal is
a camel and lives in a village. He is good to eat, so kill
him .'
-'I won't kill a guest,' replied the lion. 'Assure him
that his life will be spared and bring him to me. Then
I can ask him why he is here.'
"They all went to the camel and won his confidence,
after assuring him that his life would be safe and brought
him to Madotkata.
"The camel bowed and stood before the lion. Madotkata
asked him for his story and he told the lion how he
had come to be separated from his caravan. When he
had finished, the lion said, 'Krathanaka* ! Don't return
to the village to be a beast of burden. Stay with me.
You can live in this jungle without any anxiety and feast
on the emerald-coloured grass.' The camel agreed and
began to live happily amongst them.
"One day, Madotkata had a fight with a mad elephant
and he was wounded by the elephant's sharp tusks, but
despite his injuries, he did not die. However, his boay
became so weak, that he could not take so much as a
few steps, and as a result, the crow and all the other
animals, dependent on him for food, began to starve.
"Then the lion said, 'Go and find some animal that I
can kill even in this condition, so that I can provide
food for you.'
" All the animals wandered around everywhere, but 
could not find such an animal. Then the crow and the
j acka,l put their heads together.
-'Crow ! ' said the jackal. 'What's the point of wandering
about when this camel could easily be killed to provide
us with food ?'
-'You're right,' replied the crow, 'but the master has
assured him that his life will be spared, so perhaps he
won't agree to kill him .'
"Said the jackal, 'I'll influence the master in such a
way, that he will agree to kill the camel. Now it's better
if you wait here until I come back ! '
"With this, the jackal went to the lion and said, 'Master.!
We have wandered all over the jungle, but have been
unable to find any animal at all. What are we to do?
We're so starved that we can't even walk properly. But
i f you were to kill this camel here, his flesh would satisfy
all our hunger.'
"When the lion heard his wicked words, he cried out
furiously, 'Shame on you , you rascal! Say that again and
I will kill you on the spot! How can I kill him , when
'
I 've assured him that his life will be safe ! '
-'Master ! ' said the jackal . 'It is certainly a sin to kill
him after giving him this guarantee, but if he offers
himself to you, of his own free will, then it is no sin
to kill him . Otherwise, kill one of us, for you are
desperately in need of food to stay alive. What is the
good of our lives, if we tannot
use them in our m aster's
\
.
service. As they say:
.
"The head of the family
Must be protected in every way possible,
For if he dies, the whole family will come to grief."
-'In any case, if something unfortunate should happen
to you, we must all go into the fire and burn ourselves
to death.'
"When the lion heard this, he said, 'Then do what
you think best.'
"So, the jackal returned to the other animals and said,
'Our master is very sick and who will protect us, if
something happens to him? Now nothing is to be gained
. wandering around, looking for food, so let us go
and offer him our own bodies. In this way, we shall
repay our debt to the master.'
"Then they all went and stood before the lion . with
tears in their eyes and bowed before him.
"When the lion saw them, he asked, 'Well, have you
found any animal?' One of them, the crow, said, 'Master,
we have wandered everywhere but unfortunately we
have not found any such animal. So eat me so that yo_u
can stay alive, and for this sacrifice, I shall go to heaven.'
"When the j ackal heard this, he said to the crow, 'YOlJr
body is too small. Even if the master eats you, it won't
keep him alive. Still, you have s hown your devotion to
him and freed yourself from your debts. You will be
praised here on earth and also in heaven. Now I too
shall offer myself.'
"Then the jackal stood humbly before the lion and
said, 'Master, eat me so that you can stay alive, and for
this sacrifice, I shall go to heaven.' But the lion shook
his head sadly.
"When the · camel saw all this, he thought . to himself,
'These two have spoken beautifully, but the master has
eaten neither of them, so I too shall take my turn. '
"So the camel said to the jackal and to the crow, 'You
have both spoken well, but you are both carnivorous
animals and belong to the same caste as  lion, so
how can he eat you? Stand aside, I too shall offer myself
to him ! '
"When the camel had said this, he went and Istood
·before the lion. He bowed low and said, 'Master, you
should not kill either of these animals instead eat me,
so that you can stay alive, and for this sacrifice, I shall
go to heaven.'
"As soon as the camel had finished speaking, the lion
fell on him and tore him apart. And he was eaten by
the hungry animals.
-"And so," continued Sanjivaka, "that's why I said :
'Wicked people, alt.hou'p-h they may be insignificant,
Are mean-minded and live deceptively;
One way or another, they will cause you death,
Just as the jackal and the others did to the camel.'
-"My friend, " Sanjivaka went on, "the lion is
surrounded by despicable people. I have thoroughly
u nderstood that. And there is no doubt about it, someone
has aroused his ange1 against me, that's why he speaks
as he does, for:
'Even soft water drops,
Falling persistently on a rock,
Wear it away :
So- too, continuous complaints
Against someone else,
Poison a man's mind.'
-"Ah, well," went on Sanjivaka, "tell me as a friend,
as things stand, what should I do?"
="Better leave the country and go somewhere else, "
replied Damanaka. 'You should never serve someone
like that, for they say:
'Abandon a master,
Who is conceited
Or unable to differentiate between good and bad,
Or immoral . in his way.' "
-"That is true," said Sanjivaka, "but even if I go
somewhere else, I am not sure that I would escape, for
the master is very angry with me and will pursue me
wherever I go. And so, I think that there is no other
honouraDle alternative for me but to fight him .''
When Damanaka heard this, he- began to think, "This
cursed ox seems to have made up his mind to fight. If
he 'rere to run his horns through the master, it would
be a disaster for us all. So I must influence him in such
a way that he leaves this place.''
Then, aloud, he said to Sanjivaka, "Friend, what you
say is true but is a fight between servant and master
becoming? And what is more:
'He who attacks an enemy Without knowing his strength,
Will be defeated,
As the Sea was defeated by the tittibha* birds.' "
-"How was that?" asked Sanjivaka.
And Damanaka told :
THE STORY OF THE TITTIBHA BIRDS AND
THE SEA
"Somewhere in the world, on a seashore, there lived
a pair of tittibha birds, husband and wife .. I n . the course
of time, the female was expecting a family. As the time
to lay hey eggs came near, she said to her husband,
'My dear , it's almost time for me to lay my eggs . Look
for some good safe place, where I can lay them.'
-'Dearest,' said the male tittibha, 'this coast is very nice.
You can lay the eggs here.'
-'But,' said she, '9n nights when the moon is full, the
Sea here sends its waves so high that they can drag off
even a wild elephant. Nq, find some better place, away
from here.'
"When the male tittibha heard this, he laughed t1.nd
said, 'What a thing to say! The Sea wouldn't dare harm
my children ! Lay your eggs here and stop worrying ! '
"Now, the Sea heard this and thought t o himself,
'What kind of impudence is this, from a bird, the size
of a worm ! . For fun, I'll take away his eggs and see
what he does.'
"In the course of time, the female laid her eggs. One
day shortly aftehyards, when the two birds had flown
off in search of food, the waves of the Sea came higher
and higher and swallowed up the eggs.
"When the birds returned, the female went to her
nest and found it empty. She wept bitterly and said to
her husband, 'You fool ! The waves of the Sea have
swallowed my eggs. I asked you to find somewhere else
for me to lay them, but you, stu_pid thing that you are,
wouldn't listen to me! They say:
"Those who refuse to follow
The advice of friends who wish them well,
Come . to grief,
Like the foolish turtle who fell off the stick.' "
-'How was that?' asked the male tittibha.
And his wife told him :
THE STORY OF THE TURTLE WHO FELL OFF
THE STICK
" 'In a certain lake, there lived a turtle, by the name
of Kambugriva*. Two swans, whose names were Sankata*
and Vikata*, were her friends. Every day, the three of
them would go to the bank of the lake and tell each
other stories about holy saints and hermits, and then
go home at sunset.
" 'After a few years, that part of the country had no
rain and, bit by bit, the lake began to dry up.
''. 'The two swans were worried about ,it and said to
the turtlc:t, "This lake is becoming nothing but mud. We
are worried as to how we will be able to survive here.
without water."
-" M y friends," replied the turtle, "it's quite true that
it's i mpossible to stay here. But we will find some way
out, for :
'Even in bad times,
A man should not lose hope,
For by makmg an effort,
He can certainly find a solution.'
-"So," continued the turtle, "first look for a lake full
of water. Then find a strong stick or a rope from
somewhere. I shall hold on tight with my mouth to the
middle of the stick and you can hold the ends and
carry me like this, to the lake."
-"Friend," replied the swans, "we'll do what you suggest,
but while we're flying, you mustn't open your mouth
to speak, or you will fall off the stick! "
" 'They carried out this plan. When they had flown
some distance, the turtle saw below, a town. The town
people looked up and saw something being carried in
the sky. They said to each other, full of admiration ,
"Look at that! Those birds are carrying a round thing! "
" 'When the turtle heard the commotion, she opened
her mouth to ask, "What's all that noise about!" But of
course the minute she opehed her mouth to speak, she
fell down to the earth. And the people hacked her to
pieces and ate her.
-'And so,' continued the female tittibha, 'that's why I
said :
"Those who refuse to follow
The advice of friends who wish them well,
Come to grief,
Like the foolish turtle who fell off the stick. "
And,
" He who puts his mind to a problem
Before it presents itself,
And he who puts his mind to it
When it actually arrives,
B oth these categories escape,
But those who depend on luck,
Will be destroyed,
As Yadbhavishya* was, by the fishermen." '
-'How was that?' asked the male tittibha.
And his wife told him:
THE �TORY OF THE THREE FISHES
" 'In a certain pond, there lived three fishes, their
names were : Anagatavidhata*, Pratyutpannamati* and
Yadbhavishya*.
" 'One day, some fishermen were passing by. They
saw this pond and said to each other, "We have never
investigated this particular pond. It's full of fishes ! But
we already have a good catch today, a:qd it's evening,
so let's go home and come back here tomorrow." So
the fishermen left.
" 'Now , when Anagatavidhata heard this, he was
dumbfounded, as if struck by a thunderbolt, and he
called all the fishes together and said to them, "Did you
hear what the fishermen said just now? Let's leave
immediately for some other pond; for :
'When a weak man meets a stronger opponent,
The best thing he can do is run,
Or else make for a hideout,
There's no other way out.'
-" I think the fishermen will return tomorrow morning,"
Anagatavidhata went on, "and then they will start killing
all the fishes. So it's not wise to stay here a moment
longer, for:
'Those who, in time of calamity,
Can without difficulty go elsewhere,
Avoid seeir� the destruction,
Of their families and land.' "
" 'When Pratyutpannamati heard this, he 1said, "You're
right ! Let us go somewhere else ! "
" 'But Yadbhavishya laughed loudly and said, "Oh, I
don't agree with you! Would it be right to give up this
pond, that belonged to our forefathers, just because of
the talk pf fishermen ! And in any case, if it's time for
us to die, death will certainly not spare us, wherever
we are, for :
'A man whom fortune smiles on,Thougl1 unprotected, eludes destruction,
But the man with luck against him, is done for,
.
Even though he be well protected.'
-"So, I won't come with you," continued Yadbhavishya.
"Do as you think best."
" 'When Anagatavidhata heard his decision, he left the
lake immediately with his family.
" 'Early next morning, Pratyutpannamati saw the
fishermen coming in the distance and he too left the
lake with his family.
" 'The fishermen arrived at the lake, threw their nets
and caught all the fishes, including Yadbhavishya and
they all died.
-'And so,' continued the female tittibha, 'that's why I
said :
"He who puts his mind to a problem
B efore it presents itself,
And he who puts his mind to it
When it actually arrives,
B oth these categories will escape,
But those who depend oh luck,
Will be destroyed,
As Yadbhavishya was, by the fishermen.'' '
-'But my dear,' said the male tittibha, 'do you think
I'm as stupid as Yadbhavishya! You'll see how brilliant
I am when I dry up the Sea ! '
-'How can you oppose the Sea!' retorted the female
tittibha,, for they say:
-"When a weakling gets angry,
He hurts only himself."
And,
"He who attacks an enemy
Without knowing his strength,
Will be destroyed like the moth in fire.'' '
-'But my dear,' said the male tittibha, 'don't talk like
chat! Even when you are small, if you are zealous, you
can overco.!lle even the strongest opponents. As they
say:
"An elephant can be brought under control by a
goad,
Well, is a goad as big as an elephant?
When a lamp is lighted, the darkness disappears,
Well, is the lamp as big as the darkness?
When a thunderbolt strikes it, the mountain
crumbles,
Well, is a thunderbolt as big as the mountain?
So the man with zeal is the man who is strong,
The size is unimportant."
-'And so,' continued the male tittibha bird, 'I shall dry
up the whole Sea, by sucking it up in my beak.'
-'My dear fellow,' said his wife, 'how could you suck
up the Sea when the Sindhu* and the Ganga* along
with · hundreds of other rivers flow into it. What's the
good of babbling?'
-'My dear,' said the male tittibha, 'my beak is as solid
as iron. Why can't I suck up the Sea, if I w6rk day
and night at it? And until a man puts some effort into
what he is doing, he does not succeed.'
-'My dear,' said the female, 'if you really want to
quarrel with the Sea, then send a message to some of
the other birds and do this with their help, for :
"Small insignificant things united,
Become unconquerable;
Thin blades of grass, woven into a thick rope
Can tie up an elephant.
In the same way working together,
A sparrow, a woodpecker, a fly and a frog
Killed an elephant." '
-'How was that ?' asked the male tittibha.
And his wife tpld him :
THE STORY OF THE ELEPHANT
AND THE SPARROW
" 'Somewhere in the jungle, a pair of sparrows had
made their nest in a Tamal* tree. In due course, the
female sparrow laid her eggs' there.
" 'One day, because of tremendous heat, an agitated
elephant came and stood under the shade of the tree.
With his trunk, he caught hold of the branches
supporting the spar'rows' nest and pulled them down.
The nest fell to the ground and the eggs were smashed.
Luckily the sparrows managed, to escape but, because
she had lost her eggs, the female sparrow was
heart-broken and began to cry loudly.
" 'A woodpecker, listening to her sobs, felt touched .
He went over to her and said, "My good sparrow1 what's
the point of crying about it, for they say:
'Wise men don't grieve
Over lost things, the dead
And what belongs to the past:
But a fool weeps over things
Not worth his tears.
He adds sorrow
To the sorrow already existing,
So his suffering is doubled .
That's the difference
Between wise men and fools.' "
-"That's true," said the sparrom, "but this elephant has
killed my children. If you are my friend, please find
some way of . destroying him, so that I can forget the
loss of mf eggs."
-"I will," said the woodpecker, for :
· 'A friend k a friend when he helps you in trouble,
A son is a son when he obeys his parents,
A servant is a servant when he performs his duties,
And a wife is a wife when she makes her husband
happy.'
And,
'In affluent times,
All men are your friertds,
But the person wiio helps you
When times are bad,
Regard him as your true friend,
Even when he belongs to a different caste.'
-"Now I too have a friend, a fly called Veenarava *.
Let's go and ask her to help us, destroy this cruel
elephant.''
" 'And so, the woodpecker went with the female
sparrow to the fly, and said to her, "My friend, this
sparrow is a dear friend of mine. A wicked elephant
has destroyed her eggs, please help us find a way to
kill him."
-"Certainly I'll help you , my good friend , " replied the
fly, "otherwise, what is a friend for? Now I too have a
friend, a frog by _the name of Meghanad*. Let's go and
ask him to help us destroy this cruel elephant."
" 'And so, th,ey all went together to the frog and told
him what . had happened. Then the frog said, "What
can this elephant do against us, if we work together?
Listen, I have a plan. Fly! When the sun is at the highest
point, you go and buzz in his ears, so that in sheer
ecstasy, he closes his eyes. Then, woodpecker ! You peck
his eyes, . and blind him. Then I will sit at the edge of
the pit that's near by and croak. When the elephant is
thirsty, hearing me croak, he will come to the pit,
thinking it is a lake full of water. He will fall right in
and, being unable to get out again, he'll die. Now, if
we follow this plan we'll have our revenge. "
" 'The others agreed and they carried out the plan
successfully: the elephant groped his way to the muddy
pit, fell in and died.
-'And so,' continued the female tittibha, 'that's why I
said :
"Working together,The sparrow, the woodpecker, the fly and the frog,
Killed an elephant." '
-'All right then,' said the male tittibha, 'I'll dry up the
Sea with the help of my friends!'
"And so, the male tittibha sent a call to the crane, the
swan, the peacock and the rest of them, and said, 'The
Sea has insulted us by stealing our eggs. Think of a
way to dry him up completely.'
"At this, all the birds came together to discuss the
situation. 'We can't suck up the Sea in our beaks,' they
said, 'so what's the good of trying? As they say:
"When a weak man, blown up with self-importance,
Attacks a strong enemy,
He has to retreat,
.
Like an elephant with a broken tusk."
-'Instead , we should go and tell everything to Garuda*,
our king. If he is angry that his people have been
insulted, then he himself will take revenge. But, even
supposing, that out of pride, he refuses to help us, all
the same, we shall feel relieved, for they say:
"When a man can tell his sorrows
To an affectionate friend
Or a dutiful servant,
An obedient wife
Or a powerful master,
That rnan finds relief."
-'So, we'll all go to Canida, our master.'
"The birds went to him, with glum faces and tears in
their eye11, and began to sigh piteously, 'Oh Master, what
a catastrophe! You are our protector and yet the Sea
has robbed the good tittibhas of their eggs. If this sort
of thing continues, one day our whole race will be
destroyed. They say:
"A king is a kinsman to those without family,
An eye to the blind,
And a father to the la":-abiding.
Just as a gardener looks after his plants,
So a king should take care of his subjects." 
"When Garuda heard the birds wailing, h e thought to
himself, 'The&e birds are right! I will go and dry up
the Sea l '
" B u t just a s h e was thinking this, a messenger arrived
from Lord Vishnu*, and said, 'Noble Garuda! I have
been sent by Lord Vishnu. He wants you for some
divine work in Amaravati*. You had better come quickly
with me.'
"When Garuda heard this, he said petulantly,
'Messenger! What could Lord Vishnu want with such a
commonplace servant as I am! Please give him my
regards and ask him to find another servant instead of
me!'
-'Garuda ! ' said the messenger, 'You've never talked like
that before ! Tell me, how has our Master offended
you ? '
-'Well,' said Garuda, 'the Sea, Lord Vishnu'a resting
place, has swallowed up the tittibha birds' eggs. If my
Lord Vishnu does not force the Sea to return them, I
refuse to serve him any more. This is my firm resolution.
Go and report all this to your Master.'
"When Lord Vishnu heard from the Messenger that
Garuda was sulking, he thought to himself, 'I understand
why he is sulking. I'll go and see him myself and pacify
him, for they say:
"He who has his own interests at heart,
Should avoid offending anyone,
But should handle other with affecti9n,
As he would his own son." '
"With these thoughts in his mind, Lord Vishnu went
quickly to Rukmapur*, where Garuda was.
"When Garuda saw his master coming to his house,
he bowed his head with embarrassment and said, 'M'1..,ter !
The Sea, your resting place, by swallowing up the eggs
of my servant, has insulted me, but I have restrained
myself from punishing him, because of my respect for
you, for:
"If you fear the master,
You don't beat the dog." '
"When Lord Vishnu heard this, he said, 'You're quite
right, Garuda. Come with m:e and we shall take the
eggs from the Sea and hand them over to the tittibha
birds. Then w,e'll go to Amaravati.'
"When Lord Vishnu had finished speaking, he
reprimanded the Sea and, taking a thunderbolt in his
hand, he said, 'Wicked Seal Return the tittibha birds'
eggs at once qr I shaJl dry you up ! '
"At this, the Sea was terrified and handed over the
eggs to the male tittibha. who gave them· tu his wife.
-"And- so," con tinued Damanaka, "that's why I said :
'He w4ciJ attacks an enemy
Wjthout knowing his strength,
Will be defeated,
As the Sea was defeated by the tittibha birds.''
When Saajivaka heard this, he asked Damanaka once
again, "Friend, how can I know for certain that Pingalaka
has evil designs against me, when until now he has
always looked-on me with increasing favour and I have
never before seen any change in his attitude?"
-"Brother! " said Damanaka. "Here .is your proof. When
· you next visit Pingalaka, you will see him with red eyes
and vicious looks, rolling his tongue ' backwards and
forward across his lips. Then you will know for sure
that he has wicked thoughts. Otherwise, if you see him
relaxed and quiet, you will know that he is pleased with
you. Now, excuse me, I am going home. Be careful to
keep our conversation secret. But if you can leave this
very evening and go somewhere else, I advise you to
do so. It is much better to leave the country than to
stay and fight such a strong enemy.''
When Damanaka had left Sanjivaka, he . went to see
Karataka. When his brother saw him, he said,
" Damanaka, what have you been up to?"
-"I have been working h<l:rd, sowing the seed of discord
between those two," said Damanaka. "Whatever happens
how is the will of Fate. They say:
'Lakshmi bestows her favours,
On the zealous man.
She scorns the idle,
Who depend entirely on luck.
So, brush destiny aside
And try with all your might.
If you still fail,
Find out what went wrong.' "
-"How have you sown the seed of discord? " asked
Karataka.
-'' I have made them quarrel by telling each of them
contradictory lies," said Damanaka; "You will never again
see them sitting together, discussing things."
-"It was. wrong of you to have separated the twp
'
friends," said Karataka, "for it is far easier to destroy
something than to build it up. As they say:
'The wind has the strength to pull down a tree
B u t not to raise it again.
So also, a small-minded man can destroy others'
work
But he cannot . reconstruct it.' "
-"You don't know anything about the nitishastras," said
Damanaka, "or you would never talk like that, for they
say:
'Suppress your enemy and diseases
At the very beginning,
Or they will become strong
And destroy you.'
-"Sanjivaka has become our enemy. It is .because of
him that we have ceased to function as ministers. And
so I have secretly planned his death. But even if he is
not killed, he will certainly run away. You are the only
person to know about this. It's very essential for us to
carry out this plan, to serve our own ends, for:
'Let your heart be hard as stone
And your tongue as soft as butter,
Destroy your enemy without mercy.'
"With Sanjivaka's death, we derive three benefits . First,
we have our revenge; second, we get back our positions
as ministers ; and third, we shall get his flesh for food.
And so how can you find fault with me when his death
is so beneficial to us?' You know, they say:
'A cunning man,
Even at the cost of tormenting others,
Artfully looks after his own interests
And keeps his plans a secret,
As Chaturaka* the j ackal did
In the jungle.' "
-" How was that?" asked Karataka.
And Damanaka told ·
THE STORY OF VAJRADAUNSTRA THE LION
AND CHATURAKA THE JACKAL
. "In a jungle, there lived a lion by the name of
Vajradaunstra*. A jackal called Chaturaka and a wolf
called Kravyamukha* were his attendants.
"One day, an expectant female camel, who was in
labour pains, was left behind by a caravan. In the deep
jungle, she fell a prey to the lion. When he had torn
off her womb, a little baby camel came out. The lion
and the other animals fed themselves on the female
camel's flesh and were all very content. But the lion
spared the young camel ahd brought him home alive.
He said to him, 'Little camel, you have nothing to fear,
either from me or fro:m anyone else, so run about
fearlessly in the jungle, jµst as you please. We'll call you
Shankukarana*, because. your ears are like wedges.'
"And so the four of them began to live together very
happily. They entertained one another telling stories.
"Shankukarana began to grow up but he would never
leave the lion even for a moment.
"One day, the lion had a fight with a wild elephant.
The elephant wounded the lion so badly with his tusks
that Vajradaunstra was unable even to walk. Exhausted
with hunger, he said to the others, 'Look for some
animal that I can kill, even in this condition, so that
your hunger and mine can be satisfied.'
"And so the jackal, the wolf, and the camel, wander,ed
in the jungle until evening, but they could nol find any
animal at all. So they returned empty-handed.
"Chaturaka the jackal began to think, 'If the lion would
only kill Shankukarana, then we could all feed on him
for a couple of days. But our master will not kill him,
because he has given him the assurance that his life will
be safe. However, with the help of my wits, I shall
influence the camel in such 1a way that he will offer
himself, of his own accord , to the lion, for :
"There is nothing in this world
That a clever man can't achieve.
So a wise man
Should make the most of his wits. " '
"With this thought Chaturaka approached the camel
and said to him, 'Shankukaranal The Master is dying
of hunger. If he does die, we too shall be destroyed.
So I am going to tell you how you could be useful to
him. Please listen carefully.'
-'Do tell me,' said Shankukarana, 'and I shall attend
to it quickly. And if I do anything for the master,
according to our religion, I shall be rewarded a
hundred-fold .'
-'Then friend,' said the jackal, 'you should offer your
body to the master to save his life, a'nd for this sacrifie&;
the master will guarantee that you will be given a bbdy,
twice your present size, in your next life.'
-'Very well then,' replied Shankukarana, 'I agree.'
"Then all the animals went to the lion and said, 'Master !
The "6un has already gone down and we have still not
been able to find any animal. But if you will guarantee
that Shankukarana will have a body t.wice his present
size in the next life, then he is prepared to offer himself
to you as a holy sacrifice.'
-'Indeed, I do promise that it shall be so,' replied the
lion.
" Hardly had he uttered these words when the wolf
and the jackal fell upon the camel and tore up his body.
And that was the end of him.
"Afterwards, the lion said to the jackal, 'Chaturaka !
Watch this carcass carefully while I go. to the river for
a bath and worship the gods.' Then the lion went off.
"When he had gone, the jackal thought to himself,
'How can I contrive to enjoy this carcass all to myself?'
"He thought about it for a little while, then he hit
upon a plan .
"He said to the wolf, 'Ho! Wolfi You're hungry, aren't
you? Until the master comes back, have a few mouthfuls
of this camel's flesh. I 'll make up a story to tell him,
as an excuse, when he returns.'
"But the wolf had hardly begun to eat, when the jackal
shou ted , 'Look out, Kravyamukha ! Here's the master
coming back! Leave it alone! Get away from it ! ' The
wolf immediately stopped eating.
"When the lion arrived, he saw that the camel's heart
had been removed. He frowned and said angrily, 'Who
has contaminated my food ? Tell me his name and I
shall kill him on the s pot!'
"The wolf started looking at the jackal, as much as to
say, 'Well, go on, say something to calm him down.'
"But the jackal only smiled and said to the wolf, 'You
ate the heart . when I told you not to. Now enj oy the
fruit of what you have done.'
"When the wolf heard this, he was afraid for his life
and took to his heels.
"At this point, a caravan, heavily loaded, was coming
along the same path. The leading camel had a large
bell round his neck. When the lion heard the jingling
sound in the distance, he said to the jackal, 'Go and
see wl:i ere this terrifying noise is coming from . I 've neve1
heard it before.'
"The jackal went a little way off, then returned and
said, 'Master! Leave this place as quickly as you can, if
you want to stay alive ! '
-'Friend,' said the lion, 'why are you frightening me?
Tell me, what is it?'
-'M aster,' said the jackal, 'Yama* is very angry with
you, because you have killed a camel before the hour
appointed for his death . He has come personally and
has brought with him the father and grandfather of
the dead camel, to have revenge on you, and the noise
you hear, comes from the bell that he has tied round
the leading camel's neck.'
"When the lion saw the caravan approaching, he left
off eating the camel and ran for his life.
"After that, the jackal had the camel's flesh all to
himself and ft lasted him many, many days.
-"And so," continued Damanaka, "that's why I said :
'A cunning man,
Even at the cost of tormenting others,
Artfully looks after his own interests
And keeps his plans a secret,
As Chaturaka tqe jackal did
In the jungle.' "
After Damana.ka had left, Sanjivaka started thinking,
"I'm a grass-eater1 but I have become the follower of
a flesh-eater. I'm in a spot. What shall I do? Where
shall I go? How can I get back my peace of mind?
Perhaps if I go to Pingalaka and humbly beg for my
life, he may not kill me. Then again, suppose I leave
this place and go somewhere else . . . ? But no, then
some other flesh-eater will kill me. I think it is better
to go to the lion."
And so, having m:ade this resolution, Sanjivaka went
slowly to the lion's den . He found Pingalaka sitting in
exactly the same attitude as Damanaka had described.
So shocked was Sanjivaka that he immediately backed
away from the lion and stood, at a distance', without
even bowing to him. And so it was that Pingalaka too
saw Sanjivaka in the same attitude as Damanaka: had
described.
Furiously, he fell upon the bullock, tearing his back
with · his sharp claws. Sanjivaka pointed out his horns
against Pingalaka's belly and stood, ready to fight.
When Karataka and Damanaka saw the lion and the
bullock thus confronting each other, with faces red as
the Kinshuka* flower and eyes like fire, Karataka said
to his brother, "You stupid fellow ! You did wrong. in
creating enmity between these two. This proves that you
don't r_e_fil_ly know the nitishastras, for they say:
'Only a man who can reach his goal
Through cunningness and intrigue,
Avoiding war,
Deserves to be a minister.'
"So if you are really shrewd, you mu.s t rrow find a
way to bring this conflict to . an end . Otherwise, both of
them will be destroyed . :Ori the other hand, if only the
bullock is killed and you regain your position as minister,
then everyone will avoid the µiaster. As they say :
_ rA good king, served by a wicked minister,
Is shunned by all,
Just like a lake of sweet water,
When it has. crocodiles all round it.'
-"out what is the use of giving advice to a fool ; no
good comes of it, for :
'Advice given to fools,
Instead of calming them,
Only makes them more excited .'
-"That is what the bird found out when he g!lve advice
to the monkey."
-"How was that?" asked Damanaka.
And Karataka told :
THE STORY OF THE MONKEY AND A BIRD CALLED SUCHIMUKHA
''A troupe of monkeys was tiving somewhere in the
mountains. I t was winter. The rain, accompanied by a
strong wind, drenched their bodies, and they shivered
with cold.
"Some of the monkeys found some red Gunja* fruits
and began to blow them, hoping to make fire from
them.
"A bird, by the name of Suchimukha*, saw their vain
attempts and said to them, 'What big fools you are !
Those aren't em.hers of fire, they're only gunja fruits.
You're wasting your time! These fruits can never protect
you against the cold ! Find some place to shelter, in a
jungle or a cave or a burrow,
where the rain and the
1
wind can't reach you .'
-'Fool yourself!' said one of the old monkeys. 'What
is it to do with you ! For they say:
"A wise man who wants to succeed,
Should never give advice
To a man who has been repeatedly obstructed in
his work
Or to a gambler, who has just lost his money." '
"But, disregarding what the old monkey had said, the
bird persisted in asking why the monkeys were making
such an effort and all to no purpose and he refused
to stop his chatter. One monkey, who had become
frustrated by his vain efforts, caught hold of the bird
by the wings and smashed him against a s tone, killing
him.
-"And so," continued Karataka, "that's why I said :
'Advice given to fools,
I nstead of calming them,
Only makes them more excited.
Just as giving milk to snakes
Only increases their poison.'
"And, another thing, you should not give advice to
just anyone. A furious monkey · destroyed a sparrow's
nest tor the same reason ! "
-"How was that?" asked Damanaka.
And Karatak-a told :
THE STORY OF THE SPARROW AND THE MONKEY
"Somewhere in the jungle; there grew a Shami* tree.
On its long branches, a pair of sparrows had made their
horpe.
"One day, in winter, whilst the pair was sitting happily
together, a light rain began to fall.
"After some time, a monkey, battered by the strong
winds, . came and stood under the tree, his teeth
chfl.tterip_g with cold.
. "When the female sparrow saw him in this state, sht\
said to the monkey, 'With your hands and feet, you ·
look like a · human being. So why don't you make a
home for 'yourself?'
"The monkey got angry and shouted, 'Why don't you
shut your mouth, you slut!' And then he said to himself,
'What a cheek this female bird has, giving me advicei
This ' insolent harlot thinks, she is an educated woman
and . won't stop yapping. She makes me want to kill her ! '
"Then the monkey said, 'Why should you worry, for
they say:
"Y:9u should only give advice
To someone who specifically asks for it,
Otherwise·, 1it's like crying in the wilderness. " '
"Without much , ado,. the monkey cli.mbed up the tree
and tore up the nest in a thousand pieces.
-"And so;" continued Karataka, "you shouldn't give
advice to just any one. And in the same way," he went
on, "my good advice had no effect on you, but it's n.ot
your fault, for:
'Only the good and not the bad,
Derive benefit from good · advice.
Just as a bright light put into a dark, upturned
pot
Becomes useless,
So advice given to an undeserving person,
Will be fruitless and ineffectual.'
"The trou.ble with you is, you think yourself too clever.
Don't you know the story of Dharmabuddhi* and
Papabuddhi*? Because the son was much too clever, his
father was nearly suffocated to death by the smoke ! "
-"How was that?" asked Damanaka.
And Karataka told:
THE STORY OF DHARMABUDDHI
AND PAPABUDDHI
" I n a village, there lived two friends, whose names
were Dharmabuddhi and Papabuddhi. One day\
Papabuddhi thought to himself, 'I am not only poor
but also not so bright, so I shall get Dharmabuddhi's
help , go with him to another kingdom and make some
money. Then, I shall cheat him of his share of the
fortune, anc;I live happily ever after. '
" And so, after a few days, Papabuddhi said to
Dharmabuddhi, 'My friend ! How are you planning to
provide for your old age? Let's go to a foreign country
and make mo ey there! Besides, unless you travel
abroad, what stories will you tell your grandsons? For :
"A man who has not wandered in different lands
And has not learned foreign languages,
Nor studied various cultures,
-
And made himself a fortune,
Is born in vain on this earth." '
"Dharmabuddhi readily agreed to accompany Papabud-·
dhi and carry out his plan. He took leave of his parents
and , .on an auspicious day, set out with Papabuddhi on
their travels.
"Through Dharmabuddhi's cleverness, the two of them
made a lot of money and after some time, returned
home, extremely pleased with themselves.
"As they were approaching their own village, Papabud­
dhi said to Dharmabuddhi, 'Friend ! It's not a good idea
to carry all this money home, because then our friend5'·
and relatives will want a share of it. So let us take home
only a nominal amount and bury the rest in the jungle.
When the necessity arises, we can come back and dig
it out, for they say:
"A clever man does not show off his wealth to
anyone,For even the mind of a sage
May be .shaken by the sight of money." '
-'Very well theri,' replied Dharmabuddhi, 'we will.'
"And so after burying most of the 1 money, they
returned home With the remainder and lived happily.
"Some time after, at dead of night, Papabuddhi went
to the jungle, uncovered all the money that was buried
there, took it out, and closed the pit as it had been
before. Then he returned home with the money.
�'After a few days, Papabuddhi went to Dharmabuddhi
and S£!.id, 'Friend ! I have a large family and as a result
my money is all gone. Let's go and fetch some more
from the place , where we buried it.'
-'All right then,' replied Dharmabuddhi, 'we. will.'
"When the two arrived at the place, they dug up tht
pit j!.nd found the money pot empty. Pa:pabuddhi began
to beat his head, crying out, 'Oh Dharmabuddhi! Only
,ynu and nobody else could have stolen the money and
filled in the pit! Give me back my half or I shall make
a complaint against you in the court of law .'
-'You scoundrel ! ' said Dharmabuddhi: 'Don't you talk
_ like that! I am indeed Dharmabuddhi * l I could never
commit such a theft! For they say:
"A righteous man looks upon oth'er men's women
As his own mother,
And other men's wealth
As crow droppings
And other human beings
As \!is own self." '
"And so, fighting like this, they went to the judges
and accused each other. The judges ordered them to
submit themselves to trial by fire* to find out the truth.
"But Papabuddhi said to them, 'This decision is not
good, for they . say:
"In the investigation of disputes,
Only in the absence of written evidence and
witnesses,
Do the wise recommend ordeal by fire."
'Now, the goddesses in the trees of the jungle neaf
by will be my witnesses. They will be able to reveal to
us, which one is a thief and which one is an honest
man.'
-'You are right,' said the judges. 'We are very anxiorn:
to know the truth about this. So, tomorrow morning
you must both accompany us to the jungle.'
"After that, Papabuddhi went home and said to his
father, ' I have stolen a huge amount of money belonging
to Dharmabuddhi and we have taken the matter to the
court. Now only your co-operation will save me.
Otherwise I shall lose not only the money but also my
life.'
-'My son !' said the · father. 'Tell me quickly what I can
do to save y011 and make the money secure.'
-'Well,' said Papabuddhi, 'in the jungle, there is a Shami
tree, which is hollow inside. You get into the hollow
now so that, tomorrow morning, when we come with
the judges, to find out the truth, you can shout from
inside the tree, "Dharmabuddhi is the thief." '
" His father agreed to this arrangement and left
immediately.
"Next morning, Papabuddhi took an early bath and
accompanied by Dharmabuddhi and the judges, we11t
to the Shami tree and asked in a lpud voice, 'Oh · goddess
in the tree ! Tell us which one is the thief.'
" I mmediately Papabuddhi's father, hidden inside the
hollow of the tree, replied, 'Listen! It's Dharmabu ddhi
who stole the money.'
"When the judges heard this, they were wonderstruck.
They opened their eyes wide and im mediately started
discussing how to punish Dharmabuddhi according to
the law . .
"But, meanwhile, Dharmabuddhi put a heap of dried
leaves and grass in front of the hollow of the tree and ·
:>et fire to it. When the fire was blazing, out came
?apabuddhi's father, crying pitifully, with half his body
lJurnt and his eyes popping out.
'Friend,' they all said to him, 'whatever has happened
to you ?'
-'It's all Papabuddhi's fault! ' he replied and he I.old
them all that Papabl\ddhi had done.
"Then they hanged Papabuddhi on the same Shami
tree.
"The judges praised Dharmabuddhi and said , 'It's very
true what they say:
"A wise man thinks not only of a solution to his
problems,
But also of its consequences.
The · heron found a way to kill the snake,
Little realising that this would result in his mvn
destruction.
-'How was that?' asked Dharmabuddhi .
And the judges told :
pages no 78